And, as a result of choosing to be genuinely grateful for all that I had, unconditionally accepting of all that I didn’t, and accepting total responsibility for creating all that I wanted, this potentially devastating car accident ultimately became one of the best things that ever happened to me. Hinging on my belief that everything happens for a reason—but that it is our responsibility to choose the most empowering reasons for the challenges, events and circumstances of our lives—I used my accident to fuel a triumphant comeback. 
My first book, Taking Life Head On: How to Love the Life You Have While You Create the Life of Your Dreams hit #7 on Amazon’s overall bestseller list and #1 in it’s category. Then, the unthinkable happened. My publisher fled the country and stole 100% of my book royalties, and was never heard from again. My parents were devastated. Surprisingly, I was not. If there’s one thing that I’ve learned from my car accident, it’s that there is no point in dwelling on or feeling bad about the aspects of our lives that we can’t change. So, I didn’t. I’ve also learned that, by focusing on what we can learn from our challenges and how we use them to add value to the lives of others, we can turn any adversity into an advantage. So, I did. 
2007  The year my life fell apart. The United States economy crashed. Overnight, my income was cut in half. My coaching clients could no longer afford me. Thus, I could no longer afford to pay my bills, including my house payment. I was $425,000 in debt, and devastated. Mentally, physically, emotionally, and financially—I hit rock bottom. Never in my life had I felt so hopeless, overwhelmed, and depressed. At a loss for how to fix my life yet again, I desperately sought answers to insurmountable problems. I read self-help books, attend seminars, even hired a coach—but nothing worked.  2008  The year my life began to turn around. I finally confessed to a close friend how bad things had gotten (which I had successfully kept a secret up until this point). His question: Are you exercising? My answer: I can barely get out of bed in the morning—so, no. “Start running,” he said. “It’ll help you feel better and think clearer.” Ugh, I hate running. I was desperate, though, so I took his advice and went for a run. The realizations I had on this run became a turning point in my life (details in Chapter 2: The Miracle Morning Origin - Born Out of Desperation), and I had the inspiration to create a daily personal development routine that I hoped would enable me to develop into the person I needed to be to solve my problems and turn my life around. Incredibly, it worked. Virtually every area of my life transformed so fast I called it my “Miracle Morning.” 
It’s hard to put into words how The Miracle Morning has evolved and the global movement that it’s become in the last four years. The book has been translated into 27 languages and is now reaching people in more than 70 countries. The Miracle Morning Community (Facebook Group) has over 105,000 members and is one of the most engaged online communities in the world. The Miracle Morning Movie (documentary) is in final production, taking viewers beyond the book and behind the curtain to show people the unique morning routines of some of the world’s most successful individuals. The Miracle Morning Book Series has nine bestselling titles, perfect for various types of people, from The Miracle Morning for Parents & Families, to a Miracle Morning book just for College Students, one for new and established Entrepreneurs, and many more (all listed in the back of this book).
I believe it is crucial for us to embrace the perspective that anything another person has overcome or accomplished is simply evidence that anything—and I mean anything—we need to overcome or want to accomplish is possible for us, no matter what our past or current circumstances. It begins with accepting total responsibility for every aspect of your life and refusing to blame anyone else. The degree to which you accept responsibility for everything in your life is precisely the degree of personal power you have to change or create anything in your life.
You are in the process of writing your life story, and no good story is without a hero or heroine overcoming their fair share of challenges. In fact, the bigger the challenges, the better the story. Since there are no restrictions and no limits to where your story goes from here, what do you want the next page to say? 
Life’s too short” is repeated often enough to be a cliché, but this time it’s true. You don’t have enough time to be both unhappy and mediocre. It’s not just pointless; it’s painful. —SETH GODIN
There is nothing that says you have to settle for less than you truly want in any area, just because most people do. Even if most people includes your friends, family, and colleagues. You can become one of the few people that actually achieve extraordinary success in EVERY area of your life, simultaneously. Happiness. Health. Money. Freedom. Success. Love. You really can have it all.
You are just as worthy, deserving, and capable of creating and sustaining extraordinary health, wealth, happiness, love, and success in your life, as any other person on earth. It is absolutely crucial—not only for the quality of your life, but for the impact you make on your family, friends, clients, co-workers, children, community, and anyone whose life you touch—that you start living in alignment with that truth.
In order for you to stop settling for less than you deserve—in any area of your life—and to create the levels of personal, professional, and financial success you desire, you must first dedicate time each day to becoming the person you need to be, one who is qualified and capable of consistently attracting, creating, and sustaining the levels of success you want.
Focused, productive, successful mornings generate focused, productive, successful days—which inevitably create a successful life—in the same way that unfocused, unproductive, and mediocre mornings generate unfocused, unproductive, and mediocre days, and ultimately a mediocre quality of life. By simply changing the way you wake up in the morning, you can transform any area of your life, faster than you ever thought possible.
In the next chapter, I’m going to walk you through exactly how I used The Miracle Morning to go from my lowest point—a failing business, drowning in $425,000 of personal debt, deeply depressed, and physically in the worst shape of my life—to building multiple successful businesses, doubling my income, paying off 100% of my debt, achieving my dream of becoming an international keynote speaker, and performing at my mental and physical peak by completing a 52-mile ultra-marathon—all in less than 12 months. You’ll also discover some “not-so-obvious secrets” that will make your success virtually guaranteed.
I’ve been fortunate to hit what you might call “rock bottom” twice in my relatively short life. I say fortunate because it was the growth I experienced and the lessons I learned—during the most challenging times in my life—that have enabled me to become the person I’ve needed to be, to create the life that I’ve always wanted. I am grateful to use not only my successes, but also my failures, to help others in a way that can empower them to overcome their own limitations and achieve more than they ever thought possible. 
Listening to a personal development audio from Jim Rohn, he said something that, although I had heard before, I never really got it. You know how sometimes you hear something over and over again without actually implementing it, but then one day it finally clicks for you? It just takes you being in the right state of mind to really get it? Well, that morning I was in the right state of mind—a state of desperation—and I got it. When I heard Jim proclaim with certainty, “Your level of success, will rarely exceed your level of personal development, because success is something you attract by the person you become,” I stopped in my tracks. This one philosophy was going to change my entire life. 
Our outer world will always be a reflection of our inner world. Our level of success is always going to parallel our level of personal development. Until we dedicate time each day to developing ourselves into the person we need to be to create the life we want, success is always going to be a struggle to attain.
the author of Personal Development for Smart People, stated: “It’s been said that the first hour is the rudder of the day. If I’m lazy or haphazard in my actions during the first hour after I wake up, I tend to have a fairly lazy and unfocused day. But if I strive to make that first hour optimally productive, the rest of the day tends to follow suit.”
The Morning That Transformed My Entire Life Teeth brushed, face washed, and a glass of water in hand, I sat up straight on my living room couch at 5:05 a.m., feeling genuinely excited about my life for the first time in a long time. It was still dark outside, and something about that felt very empowering. I pulled out my list of life-changing personal development activities I had learned over the years but never implemented. One by one, I implemented each one. Silence  Sitting in silence, praying, meditating, and focusing on my breath, for 10 minutes. I felt my stress melt away, felt a sense of calm come over my body and ease my mind. This was different from the typical chaos of my hectic mornings. For the first time in a long time, I felt peaceful. Reading  Having always made excuses why I couldn’t find time to read, I was excited to make time this morning and start what I had always hoped could become a lifelong habit. I grabbed Napoleon Hill’s classic, Think and Grow Rich, off the shelf. Like most of my books, it was one that I had started, but never finished. I read for ten minutes, and picked up a few ideas that I was excited to implement that day. I was reminded that it only takes one idea to change your life, and I felt motivated. Affirmations  Having never before harnessed the power of affirmations, it felt amazing to finally read the self-confidence affirmation from Think and Grow Rich aloud. The affirmation was a powerful reminder of the unlimited potential that was within me—and within each of us. I decided to write my own affirmation. I jotted down what I wanted, who I was committed to being, and what I was committed to doing to change my life. I felt empowered. Visualization  I grabbed the Vision Board off my wall. I had created it after watching the movie The Secret. I rarely took time to look at, let alone use it as the visualization tool it was intended to be. For ten minutes, my focus shifted from image to image, pausing at each one to close my eyes and feel, with every fiber of my being, what it would be like to manifest each into my life. I felt inspired. Journaling  Next, I opened one of the many blank journals I had purchased over the years. Like all of the others, I had failed to write in for more than a few days—a week at the most. On this day, I wrote what I was grateful for in my life. Almost immediately, I felt my depression lifting, like a heavy fog which had been weighing me down. It wasn’t gone, but it felt lighter. The simple act of writing down the things I
was grateful for lifted my spirits. I felt grateful. Exercise  Finally, I got up off the couch, remembering what I’d heard Tony Robbins say so many times: motion creates emotion. I dropped down and did pushups until I couldn’t do one more. Then I flipped over onto my back and did as many sit ups as my out-of-shape abs would allow. With six minutes left on the clock, I inserted one of my fiancée’s Yoga videos into the DVD player, and enjoyed completing the first six minutes of it. I felt energized. It was incredible! I had already experienced what was one of the most peaceful, motivating, empowering, inspiring, grateful, and energizing days of my life—and it was only 6:00 a.m.! 
Step #1: Acknowledge the 95% Reality Check First, we must understand and acknowledge the reality that 95% of our society will never create and live the life they really want. We must embrace the fact that if we don’t commit to thinking and living differently than most people now, we are setting ourselves up to endure a life of mediocrity, struggle, failure and regret—just like most people. Realize that this will include our own friends, family, and peers if we don’t do something about it now and set an example of what’s possible when we commit to fulfilling our potential. 
One of the most crippling causes of mediocrity in life is a condition I call Rearview Mirror Syndrome (RMS). Our subconscious minds are equipped with a self-limiting rearview mirror, through which we continuously relive and recreate our past. We mistakenly believe that who we were is who we are, thus limiting our true potential in the present, based on the limitations of our past.  As a result, we filter every choice we make—from what time we will wake up in the morning to which goals we will set to what we allow ourselves to consider possible for our lives—through the limitations of our past experiences. We want to create a better life, but sometimes we don’t know how to see it any other way than how it’s always been.  Research shows that on any given day, the average person thinks somewhere between 50,000 and 60,000 thoughts. The problem is that ninety-five percent of our thoughts are the same as the ones we thought the day before, and the day before that, and the day before that. It’s no wonder most people go through life, day after day, month after month, year after year, and never change the quality of their lives.  Like old, worn baggage, we carry stress, fear, and worry from yesterday with us into today. When presented with opportunities, we quickly check our rearview mirror to assess our past capabilities. “No, I’ve never done anything like that before. I’ve never achieved at that level. In fact, I’ve failed, time and time again.”
I decided in that moment that my life purpose for the next 12 months would be: to become the person I need to be to create the success, freedom, and quality of life that I truly want. I combined this with my other life purpose (yes, you can have more than one), which was to selflessly add value to the lives of others by assembling a team of 16 other sales reps. I led weekly conference coaching calls to support them in reaching their goals, free of charge, for the next 46 consecutive weeks.  Living every day in alignment with my two life purposes—constantly, consciously aligning my thoughts, words and actions with each purpose—not only did I have my best sales year ever (a 94% increase over my previous best), but I also led more reps to surpassing the highest performance level than at any other time in the company’s 50-year history.  To defeat this cause of mediocrity, you need a life purpose, which can be any purpose you want.
One of the most prevalent, yet not-so-obvious causes of mediocrity is isolating incidents. We do this when we mistakenly assume that each choice we make, and each individual action we take, is only affecting that particular moment, or circumstance. For example, you may think it’s no big deal to miss a workout, procrastinate on a project, or eat fast food because you’ll get a “do-over” tomorrow. You make the mistake of thinking that skipping that workout only affects that incident, and you’ll make a better choice next time. Nothing could be farther from the truth.  We must realize that the real impact and consequence of each of our choices and actions—and even our thoughts—is monumental, because every single thought, choice, and action is determining who we are becoming, which will ultimately determine the quality of our lives. As T. Harv Eker said in his best-selling book Secrets of the Millionaire Mind, “How you do anything is how you do everything.”  Every time you choose to do the easy thing, instead of the right thing, you are shaping your identity, becoming the type of person who does what’s easy, rather than what’s right. 
When the buzzer goes off in the morning and you’re tempted to snooze, you start thinking, Wait—this is not who I want to become—someone who doesn’t even have enough discipline to get out of bed in the morning. I’m getting up now, because I am committed to __________ (waking up early, hitting my goals, creating the life of my dreams, etc.) 
This is true in every area—success, health, happiness weight, income. If all of your friends are generally happy and optimistic people, then you are going to naturally become more happy and optimistic just by being around them. If all of your friends are successful and earn over $100,000 a year—even if you enter their circle earning far less—you will automatically be pulled up by their level of thinking and influenced by the habits they’ve established to be successful.
Your entire life changes the day that you decide you will no longer accept mediocrity for yourself. When you realize that today is the most important day of your life. When you decide that now matters more than any other time because it is who you are becoming each day based on the decisions that you are making and the actions that you are taking that is determining who you are going to be for the rest of your life.
The possibility of mediocrity exists for everyone, because being mediocre simply means choosing—whether consciously or unconsciously—to be the same as you’ve always been. Mediocrity has nothing to do with how you compare to other people; it’s simply a result of not making the commitment to continuously learn, grow, and improve yourself. Whereas being extraordinary—which leads to extraordinary levels of success—is a result of choosing to learn, grow, and be a little bit better each day than you’ve been in the
If you’re just snoozing every day until the last possible moment you have to head off to work, show up for school, or take care of your family, and then coming home and zoning out in front of the television until you go to bed (this used to be my daily routine), I’ve got to ask you: When are you going to develop yourself into the person you need to be to create the levels of health, wealth, happiness, success, and freedom that you truly want and deserve? When are you going to actually live your life instead of numbly going through the motions looking for every possible distraction to escape reality? What if your reality—your life—could finally be something that you can’t wait to be conscious for?
theory—I’ve found that how our sleep affects our biology is largely affected by our own personal belief about how much sleep we need. In other words, how we feel when we wake up in the morning—and this is a very important distinction—is not solely based on how many hours of sleep we got, but significantly impacted by how we told ourselves we were going to feel when we woke up.
For example, if you believe that you need eight hours of sleep to feel rested, but you’re getting into bed at midnight and have to wake up at 6:00 a.m., you’re likely to tell yourself, “Geez, I’m only going to get six hours of sleep tonight, but I need eight. I’m going to feel exhausted in the morning.” Then, what happens as soon as your alarm clock goes off and you open your eyes and you realize it’s time to wake up? What’s the first thought that you think? It’s the same thought you had before bed! “Geez, I only got six hours of sleep. I feel exhausted.” It’s a self-fulfilling, self-sabotaging prophecy.
Then, I again experimented with each duration—from nine hours to four hours—this time reciting a bedtime affirmation and telling myself that I was going to wake up feeling energized in the morning: “Thank you for giving me these five hours of sleep tonight. Five hours is exactly what I need to feel rested and energized in the morning. My body is capable of miraculous things, the least of which is generating an abundance of energy from five restful hours of sleep. I believe that I create my experience of reality, and I choose to create waking up tomorrow feeling energized and excited to take on my day, and I’m grateful for that.” 
Here’s a quick review of the 5-Step Snooze-Proof Wake Up Strategy to make it significantly easier to wake up and stay awake:  Set Your Intentions the Night Before. This is the most important step. Remember: your first thought in the morning is usually the last thought you had before bed, so take responsibility for creating genuine excitement for the next morning, every night before bed. Keep Your Alarm Clock Across the Room. Remember: movement creates energy! Brush Your Teeth. Use Listerine® for extra umph! Drink a Full Glass of Water. Hydrate yourself, ASAP. Dress in Your Workout Clothes. Earn your A.M. shower!
when you change your inner world—your life—then your outer world—your life situation—will improve in parallel. 
If you find that you have a constant influx of thoughts, it may be helpful for you to focus on a single word or a phrase, and repeat it over and over again to yourself, as you inhale and exhale. For example, you might try something like: (On the inhale) “I breathe in peace…” (As you exhale) “I breathe out love... I breathe in peace…” (Inhale)… “I breathe out love...” (Exhale)… You can swap the words peace and love with whatever you feel like you need bring more of into your life (confidence, faith, energy, belief, etc.), and whatever you feel like you want to give more of to the world.  Meditation is a gift you can give to yourself every day. It truly is an incredible gift. My time spent meditating has become one of my favorite parts of my day. It is a time to be at peace, to experience gratitude, and a time of freedom from our day-to-day stressors and worries. Think of daily meditation as a temporary vacation from your problems. While your problems will still be there when you finish your daily meditation, you’ll find that you are much more centered and better equipped to solve them.
Whether or not you realize it, incessantly talking to one’s self is not just for crazy people. Every single one of us has an internal dialogue that runs through our heads, almost non-stop. Most of it is unconscious, that is, we don’t consciously choose the dialogue. Instead, we allow our past experiences—both good and bad—to replay over and over again. Not only is this completely normal, it is one of the most important processes for each of us to learn about and master. Yet, very few people take responsibility for actively choosing to think positive, proactive thoughts that will add value to their lives. 
As Henry Ford said, “Whether you think you can, or you think you can’t, you’re right either way.”
In other words, your life gets better only after you get better. Your outer world improves only after you’ve invested countless hours improving yourself. Being (who you need to be) and doing (what you need to do) are prerequisites for having what you want to have.
I am always on the lookout for quotes and philosophies that I can add to my affirmations. For example, one of my affirmations comes from the book What Got You Here Won’t Get You There by Marshal Goldsmith. It reads, “The #1 skill of influencers is the sincere effort to make a person feel that he or she is the most important person in the world. It’s one of
the skills that Bill Clinton, Oprah Winfrey, and Bruce Goodman used to become the best in their fields. I will do this for every person I connect with!”  Another reads: “Follow Tim Ferris’ advice: To maximize productivity, schedule 3-5 hour blocks or half-days of singularly focused attention on ONE single activity or project, rather than trying to switch tasks every 60 minutes.”  Anytime you see or hear a quote that inspires you, or come across an empowering philosophy or strategy and think to yourself: Man, that is a huge area of improvement for me, add it to your affirmations. By focusing on these every day, you will begin to integrate the empowering philosophies and strategies into your way of thinking and living, which will improve your results and quality of life.
In order for your affirmations to be effective, it is important that you tap into your emotions while reading them. Mindlessly repeating a phrase over and over again, without feeling its truth, will have a minimal impact on you. You must take responsibility for generating authentic emotions and powerfully infusing those emotions into every affirmation you repeat to yourself. Have fun with it. If you’re excited about an affirmation, it doesn’t hurt to dance and shout it from the rooftops!
It can also be beneficial to incorporate a purposeful physiology, such as reciting your affirmations while standing tall, taking deep breaths, making a fist, or exercising. Combining physical activity with affirmations is a great way to harness the power of the mind-body connection. 
For example, during the months that I spent writing this book (okay, who am I kidding—it took years), I would first visualize myself writing with ease, enjoying the creative process, free from stress, fear, and writer’s block. I also visualized the end result—people reading the finished book, loving it and telling their friends about it. Visualizing the process being enjoyable, free from stress and fear, motivated me to take action and overcome procrastination. 
“Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness that most frightens us. We ask ourselves, Who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other people won’t feel insecure around you. We are all meant to shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It’s not just in some of us; it’s in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same. As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.”
The greatest gift we can give to the people we love is to live to our full potential. What does that look like for you? What do you really want? Forget about logic, limits, and being practical. If you could have anything you wanted, do anything you wanted, and be anything you wanted—what would you have? What would you do? What would you be?  Visualize your major goals, deepest desires, and most exciting, would-totally-change-my-life-if-I-achieved-them dreams. See, feel, hear, touch, taste, and smell every detail of your vision. Involve all of your senses to maximize the effectiveness of your visualization. The more vivid you make your vision, the more compelled you’ll be to take the necessary actions to make it a reality.
The more vividly you see what you want, and the more intensely you allow yourself to experience now the feelings you will feel once you’ve achieved your goal, the more you make the possibility of achieving it feel real. 
Mastering techniques to improve your life works the same way. There is more value in re-reading a book you already know has strategies that can improve your life than there is in reading a new book before you’ve mastered the strategies in the first. Whenever I’m reading a book that I see can really make an impact on an area of my life, I commit to re-reading that book (or at least re-reading the parts I’ve underlined, circled and highlighted) as soon as I’m finished going through it the first time.
Re-reading requires discipline, because it is typically more “fun” to read a book you’ve never read before. Repetition can be boring or tedious (which is why so few people ever “master” anything), but that’s even more reason why we should do it—to develop a higher level of self-discipline. Why not try it out with this book? Commit to re-reading it as soon as you’re finished, to deepen your learning and give yourself more time to master The Miracle Morning.
While there are many worthwhile benefits of keeping a daily journal, a few of which I’ve just described, here are a few more of my favorites:  Gain Clarity – The process of writing something down forces us to think through it enough to understand it. Journaling will give you more clarity, allow you to brainstorm, and help you work through problems.  Capture Ideas – Journaling helps you not only expand your ideas, but also prevents you from losing the important ideas that you may want to act on in the future.  Review Lessons – It enables you to review all of the lessons you’ve learned.  Acknowledge Your Progress – It’s wonderful to go back and re-read your journal entries from a year ago and see how much progress you’ve made. It’s one of the most empowering, confidence-inspiring and enjoyable experiences. It can’t really be duplicated any other way. 
The highest achievers—those who are balanced and focused on achieving Level 10 success in nearly every area of their lives—are exceedingly grateful for what they have, regularly acknowledge themselves for what they’ve accomplished, and are always at peace with where they are in their lives. It’s the dueling idea that I am doing the best that I can in this moment, and at the same time, I can and will do better. This balanced self-assessment prevents that feeling of lack—of not being, having, doing enough—while still allowing them to constantly strive to close their potential gap in each area.
√ Silence (5 minutes)  √ Affirmations (5 minutes)  √ Visualization (5 minutes)  √ Exercise (20 minutes)  √ Reading (20 minutes)  √ Scribing (5 minutes)  Total Time:  60 minutes
In his bestselling book Eat That Frog, the legendary productivity expert Brian Tracy shows how getting things done in the morning leads to mental rewards that can take us to great heights in our lives. It is the idea that doing the hard task first (“frog eating”) and getting it out of the way creates momentum and makes the rest of the day more productive.
Humans need variety. It’s important that you keep your Miracle Morning feeling fresh and new. As one of my first mentors once told me whenever I complained about my work as a sales rep getting boring, “Whose fault is it that it’s boring? And whose responsibility is it to make it fun again?” This is a great lesson that I’ve never forgotten. Whether it’s our routines or our relationships, it’s our responsibility to actively and continuously make them the way we want them to be.
The first 10 days of implementing any new habit, or ridding yourself of any old habit, can feel almost unbearable.
The problem for most people is that they don’t realize that this seemingly unbearable first 10 days is only “temporary.” Instead, they think it’s the way the new habit feels, and will always feel, telling themselves: If the new habit is this painful, forget it—it’s not worth it.
After you get through the first 10 days—the most difficult 10 days—you begin the 2nd 10-day phase, which is considerably easier. You will be getting used to your new habit. You will also have developed some confidence and positive associations to the benefits of your habit.
When you enter the final 10 days—the home stretch—the few people that make it this far almost always make a detrimental mistake: adhering to the popular advice from the many experts who claim it only takes 21 days to form a new habit.  Those experts are partly correct. It does take 21 days—the first two phases—to form a new habit. But the third 10-day phase is crucial to sustaining your new habit, long term. The final 10 days is where you positively reinforce and associate pleasure with your new habit. You’ve been primarily associating pain and discomfort with it during the first 20 days. Instead of hating and resisting your new habit, you start feeling proud of yourself for making it this far.  Phase Three is also where the actual transformation occurs, as your new habit becomes part of your identity. It transcends the space between something you’re trying and who you’re becoming. You start to see yourself as someone who lives the habit. 
It’s days 21-30 where you really start enjoying the habit, which is what will make you continue it in the future. 
Between Jon and Katie’s enthusiastic testimonies for marathon running, I was starting to think maybe it was time for me to overcome my limiting belief about not being a runner, and just start running. Like everything else in life, if they could do it, then so could I. So I did. 
Let’s just say that I gained more self-awareness and grew more in a week from reading those responses than I had grown in the previous 5 years combined—and possibly my entire life. It was incredible. It wasn’t easy to put myself in such a vulnerable position and look at all of my flaws—but it was life-changing. It was career-advancing. It was relationship-improving. And it was all a result of mustering up enough courage to send what is probably the most important email that I have ever sent: The Email That Will Change Your Life. 
Problem: Feedback avoidance. Most people don’t enjoy negative feedback, so they completely avoid asking for feedback. This prevents them from gaining invaluable data about their strengths and weaknesses, thus preventing them from capitalizing on the former and significantly improving the latter.  Solution: Actively seeking and learning from the honest feedback of people who know you (in various capacities) is one of the most effective and fastest ways to gain a new perspective and accelerate your personal development and success.  Instructions: Type the following text into an email (feel free to edit and personalize the email so that it sounds like you.) Send it to 5-30 people (the more the better) who know you well enough to give you an honest assessment of your strengths and weaknesses. This may include friends, family, colleagues, mentors, teachers, former employers or managers, customers, your significant other, and if you’re brave enough… wait for it—your ex-significant others. (Seriously.) Important: Be sure to put the outgoing email addresses in the BCC field of the email, so that each recipient doesn’t see everyone else you’re sending it to. (Or, you can copy and paste, then send the email to each person individually.) Subject Line: This means a lot… Or Would love to get your opinion… Email Text: Dear friends, family, and colleagues:  Thank you so much for reading this email. This isn’t an easy one for me to send, but it is extremely important to me, so I sincerely appreciate you investing your valuable time reading (and hopefully responding to) it.  This email is going out to only a select group of people. Each of you knows me well, and I’m hoping will give me honest feedback about my strengths and most importantly, my weaknesses (aka “areas of improvement.”) I’ve never done anything like this before, but I feel that for me grow and improve as a person, I need to get a more accurate picture of how I’m showing up to the people that matter most to me. In order to become the person I need to be to create the life and contribute to others at the levels that I want, I need your feedback. 
So, all I’m asking is that you take just a few minutes to email me back with what you honestly think are my top 2-3 “areas of improvement.” If it will make you feel better to also list my top 2-3 “strengths” (I’m sure it will make me feel better ), you are definitely welcome to. That’s it. And please don’t sugarcoat it or hold back anything. I will not be offended by anything that you share. In fact, the more “brutally” honest you are, the more leverage it will give me to make positive changes in my life.  Thank you again, and if there is anything else I can do to add value to your life, please let me know.  With sincere gratitude,  Your Name
